Marsupials are a group of mammals that give birth to underdeveloped young. The young stays there for several months. Pregnancies in hamsters last about two weeks. It feeds on the mother’s milk until it is fully developed. Marsupials include kangaroos, koalas, opossums, and others. Humans have long depended on other mammals for meat and milk. Mammals range in size from a tiny bat to a huge whale. The Philippine bamboo bat weighs only about 0.05 ounce (1.5 grams).
Tamed horses and other animals have provided transportation and have helped in farm work.The blue whale is the largest animal on Earth. It may be more than 100 feet (30 meters) long and may weigh 200 tons (180,000 kilograms).
Bats and whales are unusual mammals, however. Most mammals have four legs for moving around on land.
But bats have two wings for flying and two hind legs for grasping. Whales have two flippers and a tail for swimming.
Mammals are the only animals that produce milk to nourish their young. The female has special glands called mammary glands.
After childbirth, the mother’s glands produce milk.
The mother feeds the young with this milk until the young are old enough to get food for themselves.
All mammals have hair at some stage of development. Hair helps to keep the body warm.
The color and pattern of the hair also may help a mammal to blend in with its surroundings. This may keep a mammal hidden from its enemies.
In some mammals, hair takes a special form. The hair of porcupines is hardened into sharp spines. A cat’s whiskers are special hairs that are highly sensitive to touch.
Mammals are warm-blooded. This means that they are able to keep their body at roughly the same temperature no matter what the surrounding temperature is.
This allows mammals to live in a wide range of climates.
Finally, mammals have a highly developed brain. The mammal brain is the most complex organ known.
This complex brain allows mammals to learn from experience and adapt their behavior.
Behavior.Young mammals learn many behaviors—for example, how to hunt—from their parents.
Some young mammals go off on their own once they have grown up. Others stay within their family groups for life.
Individual mammals or groups may live in areas called territories. These mammals may fight off other mammals of the same species that try to enter their territory.
Some groups of mammals migrate, or move between places during different seasons.
Some mammals, including ground squirrels and hedgehogs, hibernate during winter.Other types are now endangered because of overhunting or the destruction of their habitats.
Hibernation is a very deep form of sleep during which an animal’s body temperature drops.
Mammals eat a wide variety of foods. Mammals that eat other animals are called carnivores.
Cats, dogs, weasels, walrus, and many other mammals are carnivores.
Mammals that eat plants—such as lemmings, deer, cattle, and elephants—are called herbivores.
Mammals that eat both animals and plants are called omnivores. Omnivores include raccoons, bears, and primates.